#summary description of DBSpec - super class for tests requiring database connection
<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />
= Introduction =

DBSpec is a super class for tests which require a database connection. It is integrated with !ActiveWeb configuration and will automatically open and close a database connection before and after a test respectively. 


=Configuration=
Database configuration is described on DatabaseConfiguration page. DBSpec class will look for connections configured with a method `testing()`. Example taken from DatabaseConfiguration page:

{{{
 1. public class DbConfig extends AbstractDBConfig {
 2.  public void init(AppContext context) {
 3.      environment("development").jndi("jdbc/kitchensink_development");
 4.      environment("development").testing().jdbc("com.mysql.jdbc.Driver", "jdbc:mysql://localhost/kitchensink_development", "root", "****");
 5.      environment("hudson").testing().jdbc("com.mysql.jdbc.Driver", "jdbc:mysql://172.30.64.31/kitchensink_hudson", "root", "****");
 6.      environment("production").jndi("jdbc/kitchensink_production");
 7.  }
 8.}
}}}

Specifically, line 4 configures a test connection to be used during the test.
In case you work with multiple databases, you can configure more than one test connection. DBSpec will open all connections marked for tests.

=Transaction management=

DBSpec will  start a transaction before the test and roll it back after the test, ensuring integrity of data in a test database, and also that different tests would not affect one another by modifying data in the database. 

= Example of a DBSpec test =

Lets say we are developing a blog, and we need to persist a post. A post will have title, content and author. All these attributes are required. A test will look like this then:

{{{
public class PostSpec extends DBSpec {
    @Test
    public void shouldValidateRequiredAttributes(){
        Post post = new Post();
        a(post).shouldNotBe("valid");
        post.set("title", "fake title", "author", "fake author", "content", "fake content");
        a(post).shouldBe("valid");
        post.save();
        a(Post.count()).shouldBeEqual(1);
    }
}
}}}



technically speaking you can use it for any test requiring a connection, but it also easy to use for Model tests. Model tests are tests for ActiveJDBC models. In case you use Hibernate or another persistence framework, you will have to setup connections in a different way.


Here is an example of a model we are testing:
{{{
public class Post extends Model {
    static {
        validatePresenceOf("title", "content");
        validatePresenceOf("author").message("Author must be provided");
    }
}
}}} 